Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
June the 18th, 1972, was the first Father's Day that Vic Reid would observe as a dad.
But that celebration would have to wait, and very nearly never happened at all.
Because on that summer day, as a member of the 16th Special Ops Squadron of the 8th Tactical Fighter Wing at Ubon Royal Thai Air Force Base in Thailand, Colonel Vic Reid was flying his 44th aerial combat mission over the Achao Valley in South Vietnam.
He wasn't supposed to be flying that night.
He was subbing as a navigator one of the crew of 15 on the AC-130 Spectra gunship, whose mission it was to attack targets along the Ho Chi Minh Trail and targets of opportunity in northwestern South Vietnam.
Colonel Vic Reid, U.S.
Air Force retired, is our honored guest today on Veterans of the Valley.
Colonel Reid, thank you for joining us.
Take us from that spot, June the 18th.
You weren't supposed to be flying that day.
Why not?
Well, I had flown several missions in a row on the day before, the week before.
And I was saying goodbye to one of our fellow crew members who had finished his one-year tour.
And so I was not supposed to fly the next day.
And they had one of the normal crew member had called in,
duty not including flying, DNF as we call it in the Air Force.
And they couldn't find someone to replace him, so they tried another officer who was a friend of mine who I'd gone through NAV training with, but they couldn't locate him in time for the flight.
So they came and woke me up, and I had to catch up with the crew because they were already going through their briefings and getting prepared for the mission.
There's a lot of paperwork involved with flying.
And so I caught up with them.
It was a stand-eval crew, a standardization evaluation instructor crew.
And as an instructor, that was one reason that I was selected.
So I went on the mission with them as a low-level television operator navigator.
And we were looking for targets of opportunity and trucks along the Ho Chi Minh Trail.
And we discovered a truck sitting out in the open, so we engaged the target, went into our orbit for firing.
when we were getting accurate AAA from several AAA sites.
Now AAA is anti-aircraft?
Artillery.
Artillery, okay.
And as a result of the accurate AAA fire, we had to break out of our orbit several times.
On the fourth attempt to reengage the target in our orbit, we had a SA-7 handheld missile fired at us called Strela, which came up across from the aircraft six o'clock position.
And it didn't take long for the missile to hit the number three engine of the airplane on the right side of the airplane, closest to the fuselage.
And apparently the wing immediately departed the aircraft.
and we went into a flat spin.
The pilots had given the bailout signal, but we were all pinned inside the airplane.
And so I knew I was in serious trouble when there was a... There's a centrifugal force type of thing happening because the plane is spinning.
You're on a plane without a wing.
Right.
And it's going into a flat spin.
So that force just causes you to be basically immobile.
And then there was a gigantic explosion.
And I thought I was either free falling or dying.
I wasn't sure which.
So I pulled the D ring on my parachute.
And fortunately, my parachute opened.
It's an explosion that blew you out of the plane and probably an explosion that saved your life.
Exactly.
Right.
And when I came out.
was slowed down by the by the parachute opening I noticed that my risers were wrapped all the way to the canopy so I didn't have a full canopy so I bicycle to get the canopy to fully open I could see the main part of what was left of the airplane going down on fire into the jungle and I could see another parachute off in the distance so obviously someone else had gotten out of the airplane there were also parts of the airplane that had fallen
down below where I was descending that were on fire.
And I also noticed that it was near a triple A site.
So when I came down into the trees, the parachute canopy caught on top of the trees.
I went through those trees fairly unscathed and I did one big bounce and set right down on my rear end so that I could just disconnect from my parachute harness.
And because I knew where that AAA site was, I headed off in the opposite direction for about 15 minutes.
Good idea.
So I was basically on all fours going through the jungle trying to get away from them because I figured they probably saw me.
And so after I got away from them for about 15 minutes, I found a good hiding place, got out my survival radio, and made contact with the first person I could make contact with.
And they told me to come up on
radio every hour on the hour.
They were going to try and pick me up at first light.
So basically I stayed in that hiding place listening for the hostile forces.
They were still shooting AAA at other airplanes that were in the area.
And so I found a good place to hide.
Like I said, I discovered at that time that there was something wet in my left boot
and so I decided that I must have been injured I felt around and found this gaping hole in my boot and put it up against a tree and applied pressure with my other foot to in order to stop the bleeding which it worked I felt relatively safe in my location because there were little animals crawling all over me and I figured if they weren't afraid of anybody else
you know, being around, that I was okay for that time.
So I continued to call every hour on the hour, and about the time it got to dusk, they informed me that they weren't going to be able to come in and get me at first light, which was a pretty deflated situation for me.
because I was really anxious to get out of there.
I'll tell you what, what I'd like to do now before we get to the story of your rescue, which is pretty phenomenal as it is, I'd like to go ahead and, if we can, show some pictures that you have brought along with you.
And I guess if we could go to those, one of the first pictures is Colonel Vic Reid, and there you are.
So this picture was taken about when?
Was this during your Vietnam service?
No, this is actually a picture from 93.
Oh, I see.
When I was in Vietnam in Southeast Asia, I was a second lieutenant.
And I was one of the lowest ranking members of the 16th SOS.
This is a picture that was taken
about a year after I pinned on Full Kernel.
So this was at about the time, and I know later on you also served in Desert Shield before Desert Storm, is that right?
So this picture was taken right about that time?
The picture was taken actually after I returned from Desert Shield.
I was a base commander at Jeddah Saudi Arabia during Desert Shield, and basically it's like being a city manager, and I had
In my position, I was responsible for Taif Air Force Base as well as a regional base commander.
And the main reason for that was because the king lived in both locations.
So a lot of my duties involved political process and had to handle a lot of dignitaries coming through to visit with the king.
I want to get an idea of the airplane that you were involved in when we talk about that was shot down.
And there's a picture of the Spectre.
Talk a little bit about that ship.
Well, the engine is, I mean, the airplane, I'm sorry.
The airplane is basically what they call in the Air Force a trash hauler.
It was designed to get everything from beans and bullets to the forces out in a location.
And they converted it to a gunship by putting 20 millimeter cannon
40 millimeter cannon and a 105 howitzer out the left side of the airplane.
It was very sophisticated for its time.
It was all computerized and you had to fly in an orbit
And basically all the navigators were the ones who operated the computers and the sensor capability and also targeted with their instruments so that the guns would shoot accurately.
And it was a very, very good system.
As a matter of fact, the airplane is still being used by Air Forces now.
Is that right?
Is this the plane that you told me, is this the plane that's on display in Florida?
Yeah, this is an old A model, AC-130, and my son is stationed at Hurlburt Field in Florida, where I went through gunship training, and one of the airplanes that I flew a number of times is on static display at the front gate.
I couldn't believe it when I saw the tail number there on a visit.
check my log book, and sure enough, I'd flown that airplane.
So it made me age about 10 years at least.
Indeed it did.
I'd like to go and talk a little bit more about your rescue now, sort of pick up where you left off.
You're on the ground, the bad guys are around you, and you're looking for a good place to hide, a better place than you were before.
Is that right?
Right.
When light started showing, I discovered
that I was in not a very good hiding place.
So I decided I needed to find a better place to hide.
And so I scrambled further away in the correct direction to get further away from the AAA site.
I found a great place on a slope that had a fallen tree and I could burrow underneath it so I could just raise the antenna on my radio.
And at that same time, I decided that the photo of my daughter and wife
Probably not a good thing for me to have on if I was captured.
Along with my Aggie ring, I buried them in the ground there near my hiding place.
And I just continued to talk to the forces that were providing air support for me.
And they told me that they were gonna be coming in with some ordnance.
And basically all day long that's what happened, is that there were hostiles beating on the trees, running by my position,
firing their weapon, yelling, trying to get me to jump up and disclose where I was hiding.
And so this went on all day long where they were pounding the bad guys, if you will.
And finally, towards the end of the day, daylight, they called and said that we're ready to pick you up.
We understand that you're injured, so we can send down a PJ for you.
We'll pick you up first.
And that was the first point that I realized that there were other survivors.
And so I said, no, I can handle getting on the lift and getting on the helicopter all by myself.
There's no reason to send anybody down for me.
And so they sent in the Sandys, the A1E airplanes, to locate my position.
Because of the density of the jungle and because of all the firing that was going on at them, they were having trouble getting over into my area, and I couldn't see them very well.
So an F-4 that was flying back from North Vietnam across the area gave a radio off my radio transmission, and they were able to get closer, and then I could direct them in.
And in the process of finding my location, two of the Sandys got shot down.
Fortunately, both pilots were picked up.
And matter of fact, one of them came to see me in the hospital later to see how I was doing.
But at that point, they were ready to come in.
They said, pop your smoke when we give you the signal.
They dropped the device.
It was only about 20 yards from where I was located.
And I scrambled over there, got on the lift.
They started pulling me up into the helicopter.
And I met the canopy.
It wouldn't pull me through the canopy of the jungle.
So the crew lowered me a couple of feet, and I managed to raise my legs up and kick a hole large enough for them to pull me through.
And once I was on the helicopter, I just kind of laid on the deck hugging it.
I was so glad to be picked up.
And then the helicopter flew over and picked up the other two survivors who were fortunately uninjured.
I know that the thoughts that you had during this time, during this some 18 hours in the jungle, not knowing exactly what your fate would be, a lot of thoughts went through your mind.
And you brought with you, I guess, sort of a summary of what it was like to be in that situation.
You put on a plaque.
Right.
And you brought that plaque and I think that we got a picture of that right there.
What does that say?
Read that for us.
It's really kind of captured the essence of how I felt after I was recovered.
You have never been, you have never lived till you have almost died.
And for those who fight for it, life has a flavor that protected will never know.
Wow.
And was that yours or where did you find that particular?
Well, I was back at Ubon after 30 days.
of being in the hospital at Clark Air Force Base.
And when I came back, they couldn't put me immediately back on flight status until I could run again.
And so I was looking around for doing some shopping around Ubon there, and I found this plaque.
And I said, boy, this really captures how I feel at this point in my life.
So it's prominently displayed on my wall at home.
Something else is prominently displayed.
You talked about that your only injury was the cut foot because of the shrapnel that went through the boot.
Hold that up high here so that our camera can take a look at it here.
That's the boot.
They haven't touched it since.
You can turn it around a little bit more so they can see the cut.
Yeah, there's the cut that's in the boot.
You haven't shined it.
You haven't touched it.
I think you even said even some of your dried blood is still there.
It's still in there.
Wow.
That's something.
That's a trophy for sure.
Oh, absolutely.
Talk about your thoughts, what you can remember from that day as you're waiting
A lot of things go through your mind, family, future.
Is there a future survival?
What were your thoughts during that time?
Amazingly, I felt like I was pretty calm because I did a lot of praying while I was there, had a lot of time on my hands.
But I was thinking about my wife and my daughter, and it dawned on me at that point that it was the first Father's Day for me.
And so I also had a little confidence in the fact, actually, I guess a lot of confidence in the fact that they were going to do everything they could to help rescue me.
So it was up to me to try and do the best job I could to help myself.
It was pretty lonely down there, you know, with all those hostiles around.
But I think my faith was strengthened that day spiritually, you know, and it made a turning point in my life.
It definitely was a significant emotional event for me.
Indeed it was.
You have a resume after you left Vietnam that I find rather phenomenal.
I guess it's not uncommon for young people that are still in the military to keep on serving even after your service in Vietnam.
Sort of talk about what you've been doing since then.
OK.
Well, when I came back from Southeast Asia, I was sent to a different airplane.
So I went to the KC-135 air refueling aircraft, and I did that for about 10 years.
I started out with an assignment at Plattsburgh Air Force Base, New York, and then I was upgraded to instructor while I was there and to a standing valve instructor navigator.
So I was selected then to go to the
to the schoolhouse for KC-135 at Castle Air Force Base, California, what we called our combat crew training school.
While there, I was given an opportunity to be a wing staff officer in addition to flying, and then the wing commander selected me to be the wing executive officer.
He often says that I helped him make his first star.
So he helped me out by sending me to headquarters SAC as a command briefer and really enjoyed that.
I was one of six young officers that were the spokesperson for the commander in chief of SAC and did that for three years.
Then went to Air Command and Staff College in residence.
And after that was selected for the faculty.
I stayed on as a faculty member for three years, completed Air War College.
And then at that time, they decided that they were going to send me to a different position, a non-flying position.
So I went to, as the deputy base commander at Grand Forks Air Force Base.
Probably one of the best jobs that I could ever enjoy in the Air Force because I thoroughly enjoyed it.
As I mentioned, it's kind of like being a city manager.
You had responsibility for everything on that base.
And as a result of that, I got selected to be a base commander during Desert Shield.
at Jeddah Saudi Arabia.
And I had to return the day before it became Desert Storm because my boss back at Grand Forks was retiring all of a sudden.
And so they had to fly me back, landed at Minot.
I was the only person on an airplane.
Got back to Minot.
then drove back over to Grand Forks and assumed command of the group there as the base commander.
And then after that, I was sent again to Offutt Air Force Base because the wing commander that I'd worked for was now a three star and he needed an executive officer.
So he called me up and said, how would you like to come work for me again?
and we're going to stand down Strategic Air Command in a year.
So I went there and supported him, and we're really close friends.
He lives in Omaha, Nebraska today.
As a matter of fact, I'm going to see him in June again.
And then after that occurred, we stood down SAC and stood up United States Strategic Command
I became a speech writer and basically support officer for the Commander-in-Chief of United States Strategic Command.
And while I was doing that, they promoted me to full colonel and decided that I needed a full colonel's job.
And so I became a senior controller in the command center there at Offutt.
And I did that for a couple of years.
Very interesting work, but it's tough on the body with all the shift work.
thoroughly enjoyed it.
Then they made me a division chief for current operations at Strategic Command, and because it was a joint tour, I could only stay there for three years in that joint command, so they sent me to Air Mobility Command in 95, and I worked the Civil Reserve Air Fleet, and I was the division chief for resources for the deputy commander for operations for Air Mobility Command.
My wife and I had now had all of our kids go through Texas A&M,
And so we decided it was time for us to look for other things to do.
So we picked College Station and Bryan area to come back to, and I might finally get to see a football game.
I want to talk about what you're doing now in a little bit, but I want to, while you were talking, it reminded me of something else that you told me.
Because you were not scheduled to be on that flight, there was somewhat of a snafu that resulted in
in the wrong people getting the wrong information and some people getting no information.
Talk about that.
Well back in 1972 they still had carbon paper and the flight orders had your name pre-printed on it and you had to sign on the flight orders.
The only problem was that the about the third or fourth sheet down didn't go through very well on the carbon paper and so the person that was scheduled to be flying
When we were shot down, his wife had the Air Force vehicle drive up to her home in Virginia and inform her that her husband was MIA.
And it was really me who was MIA.
And so my wife didn't find out until I called my dad.
using the military phone system.
He was the director of ops at Webb Air Force Base in Big Spring, and managed to get the word back to her that way.
So it's really kind of a fog of war thing, where the notification process didn't really work very well in this case.
Now you're back in Bryan College Station, and you and your wife, you're over at Blinn as a member of that staff.
I want you to talk about the assistant dean.
Talk about what your job is now over at Blinn College.
Okay.
Well, I came back here and retired on the 1st of July, 1997.
I started working at Blinn on the 15th of July.
Didn't get much of a break there.
So I've been there seven and a half years now.
I started out working in their adult and continuing education department and then I moved on to a grant project as executive director of tech prep and school to work and then I was selected in November 2000 to become the assistant dean
And I've been doing that ever since.
Basically, we're the technical and workforce education division for Blinn College.
We provide all the technical and workforce education associate degrees and certificate programs for the college.
And we also offer all the adult continuing education courses that you might see here in our region, in our service area for Blinn.
In addition, we also have responsibility for a lot of the grants that we get with the Workforce Solutions Board here in this workforce development area.
And we also get grants from other places as well.
So it's a very challenging job, but I really enjoy it.
Does it amaze you sometime how much you've packed into just 56 years of life already?
Sometimes it does, like right now.
I happen to use every skill that I have because I need to hire a new director, an assistant director, and my boss is now at a conference, so kind of wearing four hats today.
I'm glad you're here wearing one of them right here and telling your story.
Colonel Reid, Vietnam obviously is a war unlike any other as far as how it's treated in our history.
It was certainly not a popular war.
It was one that I grew up in.
I did not serve in the war, but I was certainly aware by the news accounts and everything involved with the war and everything that the way it's still perceived today.
What's your perception of the Vietnam War as you look back on it now as a soldier, as a person who fought, as a Purple Heart winner of Vietnam?
Well, I feel like the problem that we had in Vietnam was the fact that the way the war was conducted, we had to fly and fight in such a strict rule of engagement environment that it was very difficult for us to really achieve some of the goals that we needed to achieve to be successful.
I think I've always believed philosophically that the reason we were there was a very valid one.
And I still feel like, you know, that we had a purpose in being there, even though the outcome was somewhat less than any of us, I think, at the time expected.
But the people that I flew with, and they were just great people.
That's one reason that I stayed in the Air Force and made it a career is because I really enjoyed the environment.
I enjoyed the camaraderie.
I enjoyed the fact that I was serving my country.
Of course, a lot of that was instilled in me here at Texas A&M and the Corps of Cadets where I received my commission.
Plus, I came from a military family.
Those kind of things, those values had been instilled in me as a kid and they carried four.
I basically volunteered to go over there because I felt it was my duty.
Basically, I still support a lot of the folks.
I'm a River Rat, a member of that.
And so I stay tuned into what's going on with people that went through the same experience that I have.
And of course, we've opened up the membership now to people that are younger than I am.
So it keeps us fresh and haven't had original thought lately.
So it helps to have young people there.
Colonel Bickery, thank you for being here and thank you very much for your service.
It's a wonderful and it's a fascinating story.
And I'm glad that you are here.
Thank you, I am too.
It's been an honor.
Thank you.
The Vietnam War is still one of history's most controversial and debated conflicts.
But one thing can never be debated, and that's the sacrifice that many young men and women gave to do their duty.
More than 58,000 Americans gave their lives or were missing in action.
Another 304,000 were wounded.
In all, 2.6 million served, and we salute them all.
Please thank a veteran today.
For Colonel Robert Vic Reid, I'm Tom Turbiville.
We'll see you next time on Veterans of the Valley.